---
title: "Placebo Response in Pediatric Anxiety Disorders: Results from the
 Child/Adolescent Anxiety Multimodal Study (CAMS)."
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
permalink: /publication/2017-01-01-cams
date: 2017-01-01
venue: 'Journal of Child and Adolescent Psychopharmacology'
paperurl: 'http://academicpages.github.io/files/cams.pdf'
bibtexurl: 'http://grycrnwll.github.io/files/camsbib.bib'
citation: 'Strawn JR,Dobson ET,Mills JA,Cornwall GJ,Sakolsky D,Birmaher B,Compton SN,Piacentini J,McCracken JT,Ginsburg GS,
 Kendall PC, Walkup JT, Albano AM,Rynn MA. &quot;Placebo Response in Pediatric Anxiety Disorders: Results from the
 Child/Adolescent Anxiety Multimodal Study (CAMS).&quot; <i>Journal of Child and Adolescent Psychopharmacology</i>. (2017) 17.6: 501-508.'
---

<b>Objectives:</b> The aim of this study is to identify predictors of pill placebo response and to characterize the temporal course of
pill placebo response in anxious youth.

<b>Methods:</b> Data from placebo-treated patients (N=76) in the Child/Adolescent Anxiety Multimodal Study (CAMS), a
multisite, randomized controlled trial that examined the efficacy of cognitive-behavioral therapy, sertraline, their combi
nation, and placebo for the treatment of separation, generalized, and social anxiety disorders, were evaluated. Multiple linear
regression models identified features associated with placebo response and models were confirmed with leave-one-outcross
validation. The likelihood of improvement in patients receiving pill placebo—overtime—relative to improvement associated
with active treatment was determined using probabilistic Bayesian analyses.

<b>Results:</b> Based on a categorical definition of response (Clinical Global Impressions-Improvement Scale score £2), non
responders (n=48), and pill placebo responders (n=18) didnotdiffer in age (p=0.217),sex (p=0.980),race (p=0.743), or
primary diagnosis (all ps > 0.659). In terms of change in anxiety symptoms, separation anxiety disorder and treatment
expectation were associated with the degree of pill placebo response.Greater probability of placebo-related anxiety symptom
improvement was observed early in the course of treatment (baseline to week 4, p $<$ 0.0001). No significant change in the
probability of placebo-related improvement was observed after week 4 (weeks 4–8, p=0.07; weeks 8–12, p=0.85), whereas
the probability of improvement, in general, significantly increased week over week with active treatment.
Conclusions: Pill placebo-related improvement occurs early in the course of treatment and both clinical factors and ex
pectation predict this improvement. Additionally, probabilistic approaches may refine our understanding and prediction of
pill placebo response.